Agreement on a governance model for thin-edge (#1203)
thin-edge/thin-edge.io: GOVERNANCE.md

# Governance thin-edge.io

This documents servers as a guiding document to ease technical decision making in the project as a whole.

Some of its goals are:

- Making sure that the different stakeholders are represented with their requirements
- Making sure that contributors know how decisions are made and who they can address concerns/questions to
- Making sure that team members know what is required of them for the project

## The project vision

In the [vision.md](./vision.md) the goal of the project is encoded.
It specifies the different functional requirements and non-functional requirements of the project as a whole.
All the stakeholders must agree on the vision upon joining.

- The current stakeholders are: Software AG, and IFM

Changes to the vision need to be done in a plenum of stakeholders, this makes sure that everyone is aware and agrees to the evolution of the project.

## Team Structure

* Teams are either single contributors or a group of them
* They are responsible for a specific part of project, and as such are the maintainers of those parts

>     * This includes: Reviewing pull requests, triaging issuess assigned to them, and general maintenance

Reviewer: Typo: `issuess` -> `issues`

Author: Fixed

> * Each team is assigned a single or multiple subtrees of the project, as defined by the project structure

Reviewer: Question: I like to believe that assigned subtrees might overlap. Should we explicitely state here that assigned subtrees of teams might overlap?

Author: By "assigned subtrees of teams might overlap", do you mean that a subtree might be managed by more than one team? If so this is what I expect too, since some component/plugin/subtree might be used by many and therefore need specific coordination.

We have to improve the wording here.

Reviewer: > By "assigned subtrees of teams might overlap", do you mean that a subtree might be managed by more than one team?

Yes, at least partially. An (maybe far-fetched, maybe not...) example would be a team that manages `plugins/plugin_a/*` and a team that takes care of dependencies and manages all `Cargo.toml` files, so also `plugins/plugin_a/Cargo.toml` - this would be an overlap. The team for the plugin is of course able to change the `Cargo.toml` of the plugin, but the "dependency team" might change it for some reason.

A simple addition would suffice here, I guess.
Maybe something like "subtrees might be (partially or fully) managed by one than more team" - with emphasis on "might".

Overall, these 'project leads' should not be beholden to their respective companies, and instead to the health of the project and its community.

Underneath the leads are the teams or individuals, that each are allowed to  make similar decisions about the project *in the area they have been delegated*.

- Some decisions are global in the project, like the core/API
    - Team members should try and make sure to explore possible options together before calling for a vote. This mostly includes uncontroversial changes that are low impact or have already been agreed upon
    - If this is not possible, a vote needs to be held: TODO

- Some decisions are local, e.g. a plugin does not impact others with its behaviour, however it still needs to be a 'good citizen' in the project (CI, format, etc..)
    - These should be clearly scoped in their respective project part
    - However, if needed a 'higher up' decision can be requested if no consensus is achieved

## Project Structure

The project has a hierarchy to solve these two problems:

1. How can participating organizations make sure that their voice and interests are represented in the project?

>     - Each member party appoints a core team member

Reviewer: Should we change the wording here from `a core team member` to `one core team member` here, to explicitely state that there can only be one and only exactly one?

Author: Will update this - since *one* is what we meant with @TheNeikos.

    * Everyone has to agree on the core project bringing the foundations to all others.
    * At the periphery, sub-projects might be related to specific eco-systems (e.g. Cumulocity or Moneo) and therefore have independent decision processes.
    *	At an intermediate level, one might have sub-projects related to specific use-cases like “JSON over MQTT”.
* All the sub-projects share a common repository - to ease consistency across projects and over time.
    *	Labels are used to organize issues/PRs/discussions along sub-projects.
    *	Code ownership is used to enforce cooperation around key components, but the default is to let things open and to trust each other, using version control as a safety net.

```
core contributors = [SAG, IFM]

-> Project leads, one each from [core contributors]
|
 \- Responsible for `/*`, aka everything in the repository
 |
 |
 \
  \-> Delegated project Teams, any combination of [teams, individual contributors]
  |
  |\- Responsible for `/plugins/plugin_{foo,bar}`
  ||- Are trusted by the project leads (who would have to stand-in for the trusted members)
  | 
  |->  Can be needed to nest further if the project grows bigger
```

> ## Repository maintenance

Reviewer: Hey @didier-wenzek - would it be okay if I submit patches for this section, to fill the individual subsections? I would propose my ideas via a PR to your repository, so you can merge my changes onto this PR.

Author: Sure. We need to be specific on many points. Just beware we are still waiting for an agreement on the overall proposal from the different stakeholders.

Reviewer: Yes, sure. I like to believe that the repository maintenance part does not have too much points where it might collide with things other stakeholders might suggest. :wink:

# Governance thin-edge.io

> This documents servers as a guiding document to ease technical decision making in the project as a whole.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This documents serves as a guiding document to ease technical decision making in the project as a whole.
```

Author: fixed

Some of its goals are:

- Making sure that the different stakeholders are represented with their requirements
- Making sure that contributors know how decisions are made and who they can address concerns/questions to
- Making sure that team members know what is required of them for the project

## The project vision

In the [vision.md](./vision.md) the goal of the project is encoded.
It specifies the different functional requirements and non-functional requirements of the project as a whole.
All the stakeholders must agree on the vision upon joining.

- The current stakeholders are: Software AG, and IFM

> Changes to the vision need to be done in a plenum of stakeholders, this makes sure that everyone is aware and agrees to the evolution of the project.

Reviewer 2: I am more and more in favor of removing this. Thin-edge should be able to stand on its own, and not be controlled by any amount of 'stakeholders'.

However, I agree its a bit contentious, so I would be fine with leaving it in, for now.

Author: This makes sense but needs discussions with all stakeholders.

Author: After discussion, the agreement is that thin-edge is controlled by stakeholders (starting with SAG & IFM) and each stakeholder nominate a maintainer acting on their behalf. Changes to the vision will be done in a plenum of the stakeholders.

Reviewer 2: I would consider resolved then!

## Team Structure

* Teams are either single contributors or a group of them
* They are responsible for a specific part of project, and as such are the maintainers of those parts

>     * This includes: Reviewing pull requests, triaging issues assigned to them, and general maintenance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * This includes: Reviewing pull requests, triaging issues in their assigned area, and general maintenance
```

Author: done

* Each team is assigned a single or multiple subtrees of the project, as defined by the project structure
* The teams follow the project hierarchy for decisions, i.e. higher decisions take precedence

The important bits:

> At the top, each invested party has their representative, who together with the others in their group have to come to conclusions together. These should be based on the following factors:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the 'top' are the maintainers, whose job is to define and realize the project vision of thin-edge.io. Maintainers should strive for agreement based on the following factors:
```

Author: Indeed, clearer.

> - The signed off vision of the whole project

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The vision of the whole project
```

Author: done

- Feasability, accounting for future technical and cultural shifts
- The health of the project going forward

> Overall, these 'project leads' should not be beholden to their respective companies, and instead to the health of the project and its community.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Overall, the maintainers should not be beholden to their respective companies, and instead to the health of the project and its community.
```

Author: Changed

Underneath the leads are the teams or individuals, that each are allowed to  make similar decisions about the project *in the area they have been delegated*.

- Some decisions are global in the project, like the core/API

>     - Team members should try and make sure to explore possible options together before calling for a vote. This mostly includes uncontroversial changes that are low impact or have already been agreed upon

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Team members should try and make sure to explore possible options together before calling for time-consuming solutions like a vote. This mostly includes uncontroversial changes that are low impact or have already been agreed upon
```

Author: Added

>     - If this is not possible, a vote needs to be held: TODO

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - If an exclusive choice has to be made (where it is not possible to entertain two conflicting approaches), and no clear side is more advantageous to pick, a vote should be held with the majority opinion being the final decision.
    - This does not preclude that once the tradeoff changes, this might be reverted or otherwise adapted.
```

Author: Updated

- Some decisions are local, e.g. a plugin does not impact others with its behaviour, however it still needs to be a 'good citizen' in the project (CI, format, etc..)
    - These should be clearly scoped in their respective project part
    - However, if needed a 'higher up' decision can be requested if no consensus is achieved

## Project Structure

The project has a hierarchy to solve these two problems:

> 1. How can participating organizations make sure that their voice and interests are represented in the project?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. How can users make sure that their voice and interests are represented in the project?
```

Author: Agree that is lighter hence clearer. => Updaped

>     - Each member party appoints one core team member

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I don't think that this the correct approach

Author: @TheNeikos I guess this is a consequence of your other comment that *thin-edge should be able to stand on its own, and not be controlled by any amount of 'stakeholders'.* Is this correct?

Author: After discussion, the agreement is that this is the retained approach: each stakeholder nominates a maintainer acting on their behalf.

>     - They form the group of people that have to, and are responsible for, signing off on the technical implementation of the project

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - At some point the maintainers might choose to add another person to the maintainer team.
    - They form the group of people that have to, and are responsible for, signing off on the technical implementation of the project
```

As a self-governing project, one chooses the maintainers oneself.

Author: This makes sense but needs discussions with all stakeholders.

Reviewer 2: For the time being, no longer relevant

2. How to make the lives of these team members easier?

-----

* Thin-edge is organized around sub-projects - to ease decision taking.
    * The sub-projects are organized in a hierarchy
        * This makes it easier to decouple different parts of the project
        * This makes it easier to decide on technical questions

>     * Everyone has to agree on the core project bringing the foundations to all others.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Everyone has to agree on the core project as it is the foundations to all others.
```

Author: Updated

    * At the periphery, sub-projects might be related to specific eco-systems (e.g. Cumulocity or Moneo) and therefore have independent decision processes.
    *	At an intermediate level, one might have sub-projects related to specific use-cases like “JSON over MQTT”.
* All the sub-projects share a common repository - to ease consistency across projects and over time.
    *	Labels are used to organize issues/PRs/discussions along sub-projects.
    *	Code ownership is used to enforce cooperation around key components, but the default is to let things open and to trust each other, using version control as a safety net.

```
core contributors = [SAG, IFM]

-> Project leads, one each from [core contributors]
|
 \- Responsible for `/*`, aka everything in the repository
 |
 |
 \
  \-> Delegated project Teams, any combination of [teams, individual contributors]
  |
  |\- Responsible for `/plugins/plugin_{foo,bar}`
  ||- Are trusted by the project leads (who would have to stand-in for the trusted members)
  | 
  |->  Can be needed to nest further if the project grows bigger
```

## Repository maintenance

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To assure a consistent level of quality and appearance, the project has some rules for maintainers to follow:
```

Author: Added

> - clear commits

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **clear commits**
```

    is
    * Subject line not longer than 50 characters
    * Subject capitalized
    * No period at the end of the subject
    * Imperative mood in the subject
    * Second line empty
    * Body lines not longer than 72 characters

  Commits using the `--fixup` or `--squash` feature of `git-commit` are allowed,
  but won't be merged (read more about this in the "merge strategies" section).

- Ensuring the Signed-off-by-trailer
  Contributors need to sign the "Contributor License Agreement". They do so by
  signing off each individual commit with a so-called "Signed-off-by Trailer".
  Git offers the `--signoff`/`-s` flags when using `git-commit` to commit
  changes.

  To ensure that all commits have the trailer present in the commit message, a
  CI lint is installed in the github actions workflows of the project. This lint
  blocks pull requests to be merged if one or more of the commits of the pull
  request misses the `Signed-off-by` trailer.

  As a result, it is not possible to merge pull requests that miss the trailer.
- coding styleguide
  Coding style is enforced via `rustfmt` in its default configuration.
  Compliance with the coding style is enforced via CI.
- testing

>   Testing is done via workflows in github actions using `cargo test` for all

Reviewer 3: If our internal crate has `feature` flag, how are we going to address them?

Reviewer: I guess we should add a sentence that `--all-features` should be used. :wink:

Author: Added

  crates.
  The main objective with this is that a developer should be able to simply run
  `cargo test` on their local machine to be able to see whether CI would succeed
  for changes they submit in a pull request.
  Thus, all CI tests (unit tests, but also integration tests) are implemented in
  Rust and do not rely on external services.
  End-to-end system tests - that depend on external services - are run outside the CI pipeline,
  to avoid inconsistent test outcomes because of external issues.
- benchmarks
- documentation builds
  Source code documentation as well as other documentation is tested via github
  actions workflows as well, to ensure that a developer is able to build all
  relevant documentation on their local machine.
- keeping spec up to date
- evergreen master
  The project pursues the "evergreen master" strategy. That means that at every
  point in time, the commit that `master`/`main` points to must successfully
  build and pass all tests successfully.

  Reaching that goal is possible because of the employed merge strategies (read
  below).

> - merge strategies

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **merge strategies**
```

  Merging is the way how the project accepts and implements changes.

  Because of the pursued "everygreen master", merging is implemented in a
  certain way that forbids several bad practices which could lead to a breaking
  build on the `master`/`main` branch, and a special workflow is implemented to
  ensure not only the "evergreen master" but also to streamline the workflow for
  integrating pull requests.

  The following actions are **not** allowed:

>   * Committing to `master`/`main` directly

Reviewer 3: How about tags?

Reviewer: What would you tag directly on master?

Reviewer: > As of now, for the patch version up (the last digit increment, e.g. 0.7.x), we tag the release number directly on main branch.

Ah, so that would mean that patch releases contained new features?

I guess we should re-think that, yes. If you want me to, I can come up with a proposal and we can discuss this (in another issue though)!

Reviewer 2: Could you @matthiasbeyer together with @rina23q write a 'operation book' that summarizes all the individual steps needed to:

- deploy a new minor version
- deploy a new patch version ?

Including on how to backport, bump version numbers, tagging etc. So we can all agree on a flow and ensure that potentially multiple people could release in case of vacations, leaves, etc...

Reviewer: Sure! :tada: - just to clearify: By "deploy" you mean "release", because... deployment should always be task of the Operator/Administrator of the infrastructure... we're just developing here... :smile: :question:

Reviewer: Also: Where should this be written down? In the document from this PR or somewhere else? If somewhere else, where? And if somewhere else, it might be a good idea to open a dedicated issue for that.

Reviewer 3: @TheNeikos Yes, it makes sense. We should write down somewhere clearly. I understand the main scope is "how to release minor/patch versions". And the doc needs to be include
- branching (maybe also code freeze?)
- how to backport
- bump version numbers
- tagging
- release note / change log
- could be more

Reviewer 2: Yup exactly. Deploy here being the 'upload to crates.io process'.

Great!

Reviewer: > Yup exactly.

I take that as "Yes, this should happen in this document, please open a PR towards this PR" :laughing:

Reviewer: I consider this done.

  * Squash-Merging of pull requests (which is equivalent to committing to
    `master`/`main` directly).
    The github repository is configured to not allow squash merges.
  * Merging of "!fixup" or "!squash" commits. A github actions
    job is employed to block pull requests from being merged if such commits are
    in the PR branch. Rebase should be used to clean those up.

>   It is explicitely _not_ forbidden to have merge-commits in a pull request.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for mentioning it. It was not clear for me.

>   It is explicitely _not_ forbidden to have merge-commits in a pull request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Why remove this? @rina23q mentioned above that this was not clear for them and thanked for including this sentence, so I'd say that it was good we added it!

Reviewer: NVM, found your next comment. :tada:

  Long-running pull requests that contain a large number of changes and are
  developed over a long period might contain merges. They might even merge
  `master`/`main` to get up-to-date with the latest developments. Though it is
  not encouraged to have such long-running pull requests and discouraged to
  merge `master`/`main` into a PR branch, the project acknowledges that
  sometimes it is not avoidable.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Thus it is explicitely _not_ forbidden to have merge-commits in a pull request.
  
```

I would put the rule _after_ the explanation

It specifies the different functional requirements and non-functional requirements of the project as a whole.
All the stakeholders must agree on the vision upon joining.

- The current stakeholders are: Software AG, and IFM

Changes to the vision need to be done in a plenum of stakeholders, this makes sure that everyone is aware and agrees to the evolution of the project.

## Team Structure

* Teams are either single contributors or a group of them
* They are responsible for a specific part of project, and as such are the maintainers of those parts
    * This includes: Reviewing pull requests, triaging issues in their assigned area, and general maintenance
* Each team is assigned a single or multiple subtrees of the project, as defined by the project structure
* The teams follow the project hierarchy for decisions, i.e. higher decisions take precedence

The important bits:

At the 'top' are the maintainers, whose job is to define and realize the project vision of thin-edge.io.
Maintainers should strive for agreement based on the following factors:

- The vision of the whole project
- Feasibility, accounting for future technical and cultural shifts

> - The health of the project going forward

Reviewer 4: While the current bullets are fine, I think there is need for some "value" to the user aspect. e.g one can build great framework which might be feasible and align to braoder vision but not add serious value to the users.

Reviewer 5: @itsroshan  agree here , also commented on a similar line below, we need to work against common goals / success metrics and user adoption (click rates, forks, pull requests, issues , comments, number of community event attendees, discord users are all metrics we should include in that common goal) we can keep it generic in this suggestion and add a explanation of what we consider as "healthy" e.g. liunk to the vision doc and metrics

Reviewer 2: @itsroshan 

I agree that putting in a general 'value' statement into the vision can be a great idea. There are already some points, but they can be expanded of course. (Patch suggestions welcome ;) )

@AndrejS321 

w.r.t. 'metrics': I won't stop you from doing your own analysis, but I do not agree that any meaningful data can be derived from interactions. If anything, the juicy metrics are hidden away in questions like "How easy did you find it to use?" and click rates won't help you answer that.

I find it also worrisome to try and include this in the public-facing governance, as users are here to have a problem solved, and not tracked and analyzed.

Since both Software AG and IFM will be consumers of this framework, I consider that sufficient quality assurances in a first step. Once others find this framework useful, they will hopefully voice their concerns (if any).

Reviewer 5: @TheNeikos  I agree, metrics do not need to be in the governance doc (and could even be tracked "internally"), but we need to decide somewhere what "healthy" for us means. Perceived "quality" is not enough from my point of view, one of the key objective of the maintainers is to make sure the project is "healthy" in terms of adoption, and this should also make it easier to decide on architecture topics.  e.g if adoption is happening from outside of SAG and ifm, this would be very positive, and I would apply it to the core framework and plug-ins aswell. 

"I find it also worrisome to try and include this in the public-facing governance, as users are here to have a problem solved, and not tracked and analyzed." --> my statement was not specific enough, I was referring to the metrics which GitHub and other community channels already give us to measure if we are on the right way with user adoption.

Reviewer 5: Conclusion: 
- the "value and health" of the project will be defined in the vision docs (which will serve as a "alignment" mechanism between all maintainers/contributors, e.g. defining common goals)

> - The health of the project going forward

Reviewer 5: The health of the project is an interesting point, how do we define health? I believe we need to say "health (as defined by success metrics in the common vision) - e.g. we need to clearly define our expectations/goals user adoption, community feedback, quality goals, number of contributors

> Overall, the maintainers should not be beholden to their respective companies, and instead to the health of the project and its community.

Reviewer 2: I consider your suggested changes substantial enough that they should be raised at a common discussion.

This sentence is the principal way that makes this an OSS project not just in name.

If it is just the phrasing that you would like to change, a common ground could be:

The maintainers ensure that all changes in the project align with the agreed vision and support the health of the project and its community without being unduly influenced from their employers.

> Overall, the maintainers should not be beholden to their respective companies, and instead to the health of the project and its community.

Reviewer 5: @TheNeikos  I like your suggestion. ficant

> Overall, the maintainers should not be beholden to their respective companies, and instead to the health of the project and its community.

Reviewer 5: we agreed to use the new proposed sentence from @TheNeikos

Underneath the maintainers are the teams or individuals, that each are allowed to  make similar decisions about the project *in the area they have been delegated*.

- Some decisions are global in the project, like the core/API
    - Team members should try to make sure to explore possible options together before calling for time-consuming solutions like a vote. This mostly includes uncontroversial changes that are low impact or have already been agreed upon
    - If an exclusive choice has to be made (where it is not possible to entertain two conflicting approaches), and no clear side is more advantageous to pick, a vote should be held with the majority opinion being the final decision.

- Some decisions are local, e.g. a plugin does not impact others with its behaviour, however it still needs to be a 'good citizen' in the project (CI, format, etc..)
    - These should be clearly scoped in their respective project part
    - However, if needed a 'higher up' decision can be requested if no consensus is achieved

> ## Project Structure

Reviewer 2: I am not sure what steering committee you are referring to? The document already contains a delineating of the two major ‚roles‘ in the context of this document.

-> Maintainers are responsible and get to decide
-> everyone else is a contributor

Maybe it can be made clearer in the document, but it is vital that nobody gets to make „decisions“ that is not a de facto contributor of the project. Hence no committee or similar.

> ## Project Structure

Reviewer 5: in the sections above we talk about "core contributors = [SAG, IFM]"
"Project leads, one each from [core contributors]" , we should be very explicit and consistent with the naming and agree with your points on decisions. I mentioned one point multiple times that somehow should be captured: There is company investment here, so  if decisions from a company are made to pull out or invest into contribution (e.g. hiring more people) in similar areas regarding the "core" it should be transparent. There is much more then just technical decisions e.g. onboarding new partners, community work/events, promotion , tradefairs etc. If the should align with the project "health" it should be open and transparent and there might be a group we could form around that aswell which doesn't meet the term contributor or maintainer. 

--> For now I am happy to push this into a later version of the gov model

> ## Project Structure

Author: I'm aligned with the @TheNeikos here. The product-related decision makers of the OSS project must be only active contributors. I think that investment-related decisions are to be taken at a different level, independent of this governance model. A partner might decide to invest more or less in this project (by using it, contributing to it, or hiring for it), but along its own decision process with no ruled coordination with other partners. The point of this governance model it to ensure that these investments can be long-term, with a clear and stable vision (we plan and commit to go there) as well as guaranties that independent partners can contribute in harmony despite different motivations (what is built on top of thin-edge by one must not be broken by another).

> ## Project Structure

Reviewer 5: We agreed that after the governance model is in place we need to review the current power dynamics and decision-making prosses in the involved companies.

The project has a hierarchy to solve these two problems:

> 1. How can users make sure that their voice and interests are represented in the project?

Reviewer 5: I would answer this: thin-edge.io is community driven, representing the interests and implementing the feedback of users who leverage thin-edge.io for their IoT projects is our highest priority. Therefore the maintainers also ensure that users and heard and proactively engage with users through our communication channels: github issues/PRs, discussions or our community events, discord (or even occasional 1to1 conversations) to collect as much feedback and patterns. The maintainers are supported by a wider team of thin-edge.io project members like PMs, contributors to collect the feedback and collect evidence of the most important topics to work on next.

Reviewer 5: @TheNeikos  @didier-wenzek after the merge we need to ensure that maintainer role definition contains that "maintainers ensure that users/community feedback is considered)

Author: Follow-up task: https://github.com/thin-edge/thin-edge.io/issues/1377

>     - Each member party appoints one core team member

Reviewer 4: This ratio needs to also account for investment made by member party.

Reviewer 2: Investment into what? I consider this to be a particularly bad choice for OSS projects:

- Who gets to decide which investment counts? If its self-reported, then it might as well just be made up. If there is some need for proof, then it will preclude any able but just not rich people from feeling like they have a say (but they absolutely should have a say)
- Money is not necessarily a good indicator for aptitude or competence in leading a project. While several OSS projects do have 'paid' core membership positions, the size of the investment is not relevant. If anything, the knowledge and experience of the individual core members is what ultimately put them in such a position.
- Software AG and IFM have already agreed to start as equal partners. This would assuredly mean this balance gets broken in the future.

Reviewer 5: @itsroshan  @TheNeikos  I am not sure to what investement we are referring to but here are my thoughts on this topic: 
- I believe the simplification of "Each member party appoints one core team member" is not exact enough , do we refer to the fact each member party appoints one maintainer?
- And what is "core team" ? Is the the maintainer group? 

- If we talk about maintainers: 
- Maintainers should be people who: share the same vision, interact with the community, are embracing open decision making and documentation, the mainttainer role should not be given away based on the fact that someone belongs to a partner company but instead based on substantial contribution to the project and/or extensive support of the community and/or an other valuable activity - so according to a meritocracy anyone who has exceptionally contributed in one of such aspects should "earn the right" to become a maintainer . 
- We can start with a small group e.g. 2 maintaners and from there use the vote to nominate new members after they have proven themselves
- It will be "natural" that if a company will support the project with "investment" (of any kind) certain people will be able to spend much time on contributions, community work etc and for one of those areas would increase the chance to become a maintainer  (but this is not exclusive to members of the contributing partner companies)
- Next to the 2 maintainers we might introduce a "steering group or board" which consists of the company decision makers from the partner companies to ensure big decisions are in line with the companies interests in the project

Author: Follow-up task: https://github.com/thin-edge/thin-edge.io/issues/1377

    - They form the group of people that have to, and are responsible for, signing off on the technical implementation of the project
2. How to make the lives of these team members easier?

-----

* Thin-edge is organized around sub-projects - to ease decision taking.
    * The sub-projects are organized in a hierarchy
        * This makes it easier to decouple different parts of the project
        * This makes it easier to decide on technical questions

>     * Everyone has to agree on the core project as it is the foundations to all others.

Reviewer 5: I think this is the most important point. We need to make sure not only the maintainers agree on the core project but also all the people who leverage it (e.g. full-time contributors) feel comfortable with core project changes, as this might imply additional work and significant changes/rework for them.

Reviewer 5: We need to have a structured suggestion process

Author: Follow-up task: https://github.com/thin-edge/thin-edge.io/issues/1377

    * At the periphery, sub-projects might be related to specific eco-systems (e.g. Cumulocity or Moneo) and therefore have independent decision processes.
    *	At an intermediate level, one might have sub-projects related to specific use-cases like “JSON over MQTT”.
* All the sub-projects share a common repository - to ease consistency across projects and over time.
    *	Labels are used to organize issues/PRs/discussions along sub-projects.
    *	Code ownership is used to enforce cooperation around key components, but the default is to let things open and to trust each other, using version control as a safety net.

```
core contributors = [SAG, IFM]

> -> Project leads, one each from [core contributors]

Reviewer 4: As I highligted above. It should not be defined number but a ratio based appraoch

Reviewer 5: Comment: we discussed this here https://github.com/thin-edge/thin-edge.io/pull/1203#discussion_r958208083

|
 \- Responsible for `/*`, aka everything in the repository
 |
 |
 \
  \-> Delegated project Teams, any combination of [teams, individual contributors]
  |
  |\- Responsible for `/plugins/plugin_{foo,bar}`
  ||- Are trusted by the project leads (who would have to stand-in for the trusted members)
  | 
  |->  Can be needed to nest further if the project grows bigger
```

## Repository maintenance

> To assure a consistent level of quality and appearance, the project has some rules for contributors to follow:

Reviewer 5: Do we need to add some link to our QA process here? I am not sure how we enforce people to follow quality guidelines if they want to contribute. This can be a separate doc e.g. a "definition of done" so for example if someone makes a critical change in the core project, what are the quality gates to pass from a code point of view (can be all automated) and what are the quality gates to pass from a community feedback point of view (change has been described , people had a chance to give feedback, maybe a POC was outlined and findings were shared ) not proposing to overload this doc here but just want to make sure we have a lightweight checklist agreed somewhere

Reviewer 2: Yes. The idea is to move the repository rules to the contributing.md once this is merged

Author: https://github.com/thin-edge/thin-edge.io/issues/1378

on the project pace or even concern developers - they should just happen in
parallel without any influence on the normal development activities.

With these requirements, we implement the following workflow.

### Semver conformity and API coverage

We adhere to [semver](https://semver.org),
with the [exceptions implied by the cargo implementation of the standard](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/specifying-dependencies.html#specifying-dependencies-from-cratesio).

Parts of the API that are covered by semver are explicitly marked. Our public
API is extensively tested in integration tests. If changes to the public API of
thin-egde.io are necessary, these changes are documented in the `CHANGELOG.md`
file of the project, with reasoning why the change was necessary and how users
can upgrade to the new interface(s).

<!-- TODO: Expand on how exactly these changes are documented? -->

We also define the following rules for our release process:

* We release new features by increasing the "minor" version
* When we release new patch releases, these releases never contain new features,
  but only fixes to bugs.

> 

Reviewer 4: I would reword it as - "A patch release contains fixes to bugs" .

Reviewer: I don't agree. The above phrase was chosen to make it explicit that a patch release _only_ contains bugfixes and never new features.

Reviewer 2: In a discussion we've decided that to follow semver the wording is acceptable.

- The current stakeholders are: Software AG, and IFM

Changes to the vision need to be done in a plenum of stakeholders, this makes sure that everyone is aware and agrees to the evolution of the project.

## Team Structure

* Teams are either single contributors or a group of them
* They are responsible for a specific part of project, and as such are the maintainers of those parts
    * This includes: Reviewing pull requests, triaging issues in their assigned area, and general maintenance
* Each team is assigned a single or multiple subtrees of the project, as defined by the project structure
* The teams follow the project hierarchy for decisions, i.e. higher decisions take precedence

The important bits:

At the 'top' are the maintainers, whose job is to define and realize the project vision of thin-edge.io.
Maintainers should strive for agreement based on the following factors:

- The vision of the whole project
- Feasibility, accounting for future technical and cultural shifts
- The health of the project going forward

Overall, the maintainers should not be beholden to their respective companies, and instead to the health of the project and its community.

> Underneath the leads are the teams or individuals, that each are allowed to  make similar decisions about the project *in the area they have been delegated*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Underneath the maintainers are the teams or individuals, that each are allowed to  make similar decisions about the project *in the area they have been delegated*.
```

Wording should be consistent with the prior nomenclature here.

Author: Applied

    * At the periphery, sub-projects might be related to specific eco-systems (e.g. Cumulocity or Moneo) and therefore have independent decision processes.
    *	At an intermediate level, one might have sub-projects related to specific use-cases like “JSON over MQTT”.
* All the sub-projects share a common repository - to ease consistency across projects and over time.
    *	Labels are used to organize issues/PRs/discussions along sub-projects.
    *	Code ownership is used to enforce cooperation around key components, but the default is to let things open and to trust each other, using version control as a safety net.

```
core contributors = [SAG, IFM]

-> Project leads, one each from [core contributors]
|
 \- Responsible for `/*`, aka everything in the repository
 |
 |
 \
  \-> Delegated project Teams, any combination of [teams, individual contributors]
  |
  |\- Responsible for `/plugins/plugin_{foo,bar}`
  ||- Are trusted by the project leads (who would have to stand-in for the trusted members)
  | 
  |->  Can be needed to nest further if the project grows bigger
```

## Repository maintenance

> To assure a consistent level of quality and appearance, the project has some rules for maintainers to follow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To assure a consistent level of quality and appearance, the project has some rules for contributors to follow:
```

Aren't these rules for all contributors?

Author: Definitely ;-)

- **Clear commits**
  Having clear, concise and well-written commit messages for all changes is not
  only a indicator for the seriousness of the project, but also a way to ensure

>   sustainable development via repeatability of the sources of the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  sustainable development via replicability of the sources of the project. 
```

This was broken in ea79548aaf16e2f23e272cd51200e19050a794d9, "replicability" is the right word here.

Author: Applied - even if not used to that term.

  Because of this, we try to ensure the highest possible quality for each
  individual commit message.

  Because such a thing cannot necessarily or in full be enforced via tooling, it
  remains mainly the obligation of a reviewer of a change-set to ensure

>   * Exclusiveness of the individual commits

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Seclusiveness of the individual commits
```

This was broken in ea79548aaf16e2f23e272cd51200e19050a794d9, "seclusiveness" is the right word here.

Author: I must admit that I don't know the meaning of "seclusiveness".

Reviewer: Maybe it is not the perfect word. A better one might be "Atomicity" here.

The point to be expressed is that a commit is well-formed, does contain everything that has to be there, but nothing more and that the commit is one change, and one change only, that is well-described.

Author: Applied - Assuming it means "separated from each other".

Author: Just pushed a fixup using the word "Atomicity" that makes definitely more sense.

  Coding style is enforced via `rustfmt` in its default configuration.
  Compliance with the coding style is enforced via CI.
- **Testing**
  Testing is done via workflows in github actions using `cargo test --all-features` for all
  crates.
  The main objective with this is that a developer should be able to simply run
  `cargo test` on their local machine to be able to see whether CI would succeed
  for changes they submit in a pull request.
  Thus, all CI tests (unit tests, but also integration tests) are implemented in
  Rust and do not rely on external services.
  End-to-end system tests - that depend on external services - are run outside the CI pipeline,
  to avoid inconsistent test outcomes because of external issues.
- **Benchmarks**
- **Documentation builds**
  Source code documentation as well as other documentation is tested via github
  actions workflows as well, to ensure that a developer is able to build all
  relevant documentation on their local machine.
- **Keeping spec up to date**
- **Evergreen master**
  The project pursues the "evergreen master" strategy. That means that at every
  point in time, the commit that `master`/`main` points to must successfully

>   build and pass all tests successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  build and pass all tests.
```

Duplicated wording.

Author: Removed

  Reaching that goal is possible because of the employed merge strategies (read
  below).
- **Merge strategies**
  Merging is the way how the project accepts and implements changes.

  Because of the pursued "everygreen master", merging is implemented in a
  certain way that forbids several bad practices which could lead to a breaking
  build on the `master`/`main` branch, and a special workflow is implemented to
  ensure not only the "evergreen master" but also to streamline the workflow for
  integrating pull requests.

  The following actions are **not** allowed:

>   * Committing to `master`/`main` directly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Committing to `master`/`main` directly. The GitHub repository is configured
    to block pushing to `master`/`main`.
```

Maybe we should state this clearly.

Author: Added

  * Squash-Merging of pull requests (which is equivalent to committing to
    `master`/`main` directly).
    The github repository is configured to not allow squash merges.

>   * Merging of "!fixup" or "!squash" commits. A github actions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Merging of "fixup!" or "squash!" commits. A github actions
```

It is actually called "fixup!" instead of "!fixup". I know this is a nitpick... :wink:

Author: Fixed

    job is employed to block pull requests from being merged if such commits are

>     in the PR branch. Rebase should be used to clean those up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    in the branch the pull request was filed from.
    Rebase should be used to clean those up.
```

Author: Applied with a slightly different wording

```suggestion
    in the branch of the pull request. Rebase should be used to clean those up.
```

  It is explicitly _not_ forbidden to have merge-commits in a pull request.
  Long-running pull requests that contain a large number of changes and are
  developed over a long period might contain merges. They might even merge
  `master`/`main` to get up-to-date with the latest developments. Though it is
  not encouraged to have such long-running pull requests and discouraged to
  merge `master`/`main` into a PR branch, the project acknowledges that
  sometimes it is not avoidable.

  To summarize, the following requirements have to be met before a pull request
  can be merged:

  * Reviews of the relevant persons (ensured via github setting)
  * Status checks (CI, lints, etc) (ensured via github setting)
      * builds, tests, lints are green (ensured via github action)
      * Commit linting (ensured via github action)
      * No missing `Signed-off-by` lines (ensured via github action)

>       * No "!fixup"/"!squash" commits in the pull request (ensured via github

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * No "fixup!"/"squash!" commits in the pull request (ensured via github
```

Author: Fixed

        action)

  Merging itself is implemented via a "merge bot": [bors-ng](https://bors.tech).
  bors-ng is used to prevent "merge skew" or "semantic merge conflicts"
  (read more [here](https://bors.tech/essay/2017/02/02/pitch/)).
- **Dependency updates**
  Dependencies should be kept in sync over all crates in the project. That means
  that different crates of the project should try to use dependencies in the
  same versions, but also that dependencies should be harmonized in a way that a
  specific problem should not be solved with more than one external library at a
  time.
  Updates of dependencies is automated via a github bot
  ([dependabot](https://github.com/dependabot)).

>   To ensure harmonization of dependencies, a dedicated team (see "Team
>   Structure") is responsible for keeping an eye on the list of dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  To ensure harmonization of dependencies, a dedicated team for 
  keeping an eye on the list of dependencies can be appointed
  by the maintainers of the project (see "Team Structure").
```

Maybe we should use a more defensive wording here.

Author: I feel the current wording is clear enough.

- **License linting**
  License linting describes the act of checking the licenses of dependencies and
  whether they meet a certain criteria.
  For example, it is not feasible to import an external library that is licensed
  as GPL-3.0 in an Apache-2.0 licensed codebase.
  Because of this, a github action is installed to lint the licenses of
  dependencies. This action runs as a normal lint (see "evergreen master") and
  blocks pull requests if dependencies get imported that do not meet a set of

>   rules agreed upon by the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  rules agreed upon by the project maintainers.
```

Make clear who decides this.

Author: Added.

## Release workflow

The following describes how thin-edge.io is released.

The following chapters do not talk about major releases (increasing "x" in a
"x.y.z" version number) as there is no workflow for these implemented yet.

### Preface

The following chapter describes the release process of the thin-edge.io project
and the corrosponding crates.

> There are many ways software projects can be published. In small projects,
> releasing off of the `main` branch might suffice. Larger projects tend to
> implement a dedicated strategy for their release workflow.
> 
> As thin-edge.io wants to become a project of potentially many individuals and
> contributing parties, we implement a dedicated release workflow as well.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This is just boilerplate text and could be removed.

Author: Removed

The goal of the workflow described in this chapter is to have _as little impact
as possible_ on the general development of the project.
Releases should _never_ stop, prevent or even just slow down the normal
development of the project.
For example, halting development on the `main` branch and forbidding
contributors and maintainers to merge changes to it even for as little as one
hour just so that a new release can be published is not acceptable.
Also should "patch" releases (sometimes called "bugfix releases") have no impact
on the project pace or even concern developers - they should just happen in
parallel without any influence on the normal development activities.

With these requirements, we implement the following workflow.

### Semver conformity and API coverage

> We adhere to [semver](https://semver.org).
> 
> It has to be noted, though, that we also follow the
> [exception in semver compatibility as defined by cargo](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/specifying-dependencies.html#specifying-dependencies-from-cratesio),
> that specifically means:
> 
> > While SemVer says there is no compatibility before 1.0.0, Cargo considers
> > 0.x.y to be compatible with 0.x.z, where y ≥ z and x > 0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We adhere to [semver](https://semver.org), with the [exceptions implied by the cargo implementation of the standard](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/specifying-dependencies.html#specifying-dependencies-from-cratesio).
```

This can potentially be boiled down a bit to the suggested variant. No need to lose that many words over something that is clearly defined.

Author: Applied

Parts of the API that are covered by semver are explicitly marked. Our public
API is extensively tested in integration tests. If changes to the public API of
thin-egde.io are necessary, these changes are documented in the `CHANGELOG.md`
file of the project, with reasoning why the change was necessary and how users
can upgrade to the new interface(s).

> <!-- TODO: Expand on how exactly these changes are documented? -->

Reviewer: Probably no need to define this here, is there?

We also define the following rules for our release process:

* We release new features by increasing the "minor" version
* When we release new patch releases, these releases never contain new features,
  but only fixes to bugs.

### Release cycle

> Minor releases are published roughly every TBD months.

Reviewer: There is a `TBD` here which we should define.

I'm just throwing some random number in here to get the discussion started: **3 months**.

Reviewer 4: It should be based on content. a minor release can even happen monthly ( we would like to target higher frequency).  What is the need of getting into specific timeline?

Until a minor release is published, the previous minor release _can_ receive

> patch releases. These patch releases _only_ contain bugfixes (accordingly to
> [semver](https://semver.org/)) and never contain new functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
patch releases.
```

We already wrote this above in the "Semver conformity and API coverage" chapter.

Author: Applied

### Strategy

We use the release-branch strategy, where development happens on the `main`
branch and releases are done on dedicated `release-X.Y.Z` branches.

Because we employ the "evergreen main branch" strategy and all of our merge
commits on the `main` branch are guaranteed to successfully build and pass CI, a
release can potentially be made starting from every commit on the `main` branch.

For a description of the release workflow, read below.

### Release maintainer

> For every release, one or more "release maintainers" are appointed. These
> maintainers have to be in the "release-maintainers" team.
> 
> Multiple release maintainers should be prefered, to prevent release delay due to
> vacation, sickness or similar things.
> 
> The responsibilities of the release maintainers are:

Reviewer: Maybe we can boil this down to something like

```suggestion
For every release, one or more "release maintainers" are appointed by the core team.

The responsibilities of the release maintainers are:
```

That there should be multiple should be rather clear, right? And that they're appointed by the core team is also obvious, because they delegate who does what.

---

I'm not 100% sure on this suggestion here though and would welcome some ideas!

Author: I'm happy with this suggestion and applied it. Sometimes adding to much details make the reader miss the key points: here the need for release mainteners.

* Creation and maintenance of the `release-x.y.z` branches
* Cherry-picking bugfix patches from the `main` branch and applying them to the
  relevant `release-x.y.z` branch (via pull request to that branch)
  * If a patch does not apply cleanly, it is _not_ the responsibility of the
    release maintainer to make the patch apply. It is responsibility of the
    release maintainer, though, to talk to the developer of the patch and work
    with them to port the fix back to the release
* Create git-tags for the release(s) as appropriate
* Create github artifacts (or take care of a github-action pipeline that does)
  for releases
* Port the changes to the `CHANGELOG.md` file back to `main` (via pull request)
* Submit pull requests to the `main` branch to update all version numbers for
  the next release cycle

> It is explicitely allowed for everyone to open bugfix-backport pull requests to
> a release branch, but the release maintainer(s) decide when and how to apply
> them to the release branch.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Maybe we can just remove this bit, because it is not that important.

Author: I let it for now.

### Release branches

Release branches MUST be named with a pattern. This pattern is

```
"release" dash <major version number> dot <minor version number> dot "x"
```

The `"x"` is used instead of the "patch version number", because patch releases
are published from the release branches (read below).

A release branch gets the following rules enforced via GitHub:

* Only the "release-maintainers" team can create branches named `"release-*"`
* Pull requests are required on these branches
* Status checks are required to succeed on these branches
* "CODEOWNERS" is **not** enforced on these branches
* These rules are also enforced for administrators

### Workflow for minor releases

The following steps happen when a minor release is made:

1. One release maintainer creates a branch, starting from a recent commit on

>    `main`, named `release-MAJOR.MINOR.x` , where `MAJOR` and `MINOR` are the
>    respective numbers, followed by a "x" in the `PATCH`-version-number-position

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   `main`, named after the aforementioned naming rule.
```

No need to duplicate what we already have said.

Author: Applied

2. It is ensured that this branch cannot be pushed to by anyone except the
   [bors merge bot](https://bors.tech)
   (Refer to the "Merge strategies" point in the "Repository maintenance"
   chapter for more information)
3. The release maintainer crafts the `CHANGELOG.md` entries for this release and
   opens a pull request for it, targeting the aforementioned release branch.

>    They might take patches from others to fill said `CHANGELOG.md`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Maybe not that relevant to be written down explicitely.

Author: Applied

4. Once agreed upon with everyone involved, they merge the PR for the
   `CHANGELOG.md` to the release branch
5. The release maintainer publishes the release on crates.io and creates a new

>    tag for the release using.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   tag for the release.
```

Author: Fixed
